In business, we were talking about the Corps of
Cadets movement, the Goodrich incident. How do
you change the organization of the Corps? And I did
a little looking around. In your history, you'll
recall that the Corps at one time had a commandant
of cadets who worked directly for the university.
And that's what I wanted. I wanted somebody who was
loyal to the institution and not to the Army or Navy
or Air Force. how do you do that henry how do you
change the corps of cadets you know it's like
moving a graveyard so what i did was create a
committee in on which i asked the chief of staff of
the marine corps chief of staff of the army
the chief of navy education an admiral who's in
charge of the naval pro naval education program
And the general who was in charge of our ROTC region
to come and take a look at the Corps of Cadets. And
they were great. Boy, they were great. They came in
and looked at it. Have they ever done anything like
this before? Yes, they've done that before. No,
the Corps had not. But these guys, and there was a
woman, a general of the region, ROTC, they had done
something like this before. And the Admiral knew
exactly what I was after. And they were great. They
sat down with me when they first got here, and the
general, the chief of the Marine Corps, whose name
I will remember in a minute, who I really liked
tremendously, he said, okay, let's start off with
a key question. What do you want out of this
business? And I said, well, I'll tell you exactly
what I want, but it may not be what you think I ought
to have. That's what I wanted to know. As long as you
don't care if we don't give you exactly what you
want. I said, no, I'll tell you what I'd like, but
you're here to tell me. That's right. If it's the
wrong thing, tell me. I told them I was hoping we'd
get back to this. They said, did you have this
before? Yes, at one time we had it, and we'd gotten
away with it. So they were here for three days. They
interviewed all kinds of corps members, all the
officers of the services who were stunned at all
the stars sitting at that table. And I knew I had to
do this if I was going to change the Corps, Henry.
The board wasn't going to let me do a damn thing to it
unless I went in with a blue ribbon report. So I got a
report saying this was indeed the thing to do, and
what had happened in the Corps, the committee
said, was reprehensible and should never be
allowed to happen again. Now, was this largely in
response to the Goodrich incident? Yes. I think
this was the Goodrich incident that triggered it.
There may have been one in between, but I think this
was it. And so I took this report to the board. And
what could the board say? I mean, this thing was
dripping with stars. Every service was
represented, including the ROTC reach. Nobody on
there lower than a general officer or an admiral.
So, man... I had the board boxed. The only time I
ever did it.
So then I was able to, and I even, I asked him while I
had him, after I saw the report, I said, who do you
have that I ought to hire? And there was some debate
about this, and they finally said, look, there's a
guy in the Air Force who's an Aggie. He says, it's
very important you get an Aggie who's about to
retire, and he's a deputy Commander Atlantic
Fleet. He's an Air Force officer.
His name is Tom Darley. So I hired General Darley.
He had some good men under him, too, about that
time. Yeah. Burton was the Army guy. A good Marine
officer, Colonel Johnson. And there were two or
three others, I can't remember. But they were all
so impressed with this committee that they were
all walking around in attention. Yeah. Do you
think that the Corps had pretty much dominated the
character of Texas A&M? Yes. Before that time,
during that time, still does? I think it was trying
still to dominate A&M during that time, but there
was growing friction between it and the
fraternities and sororities, as you know. And
it's now in such a minority status that I think it
doesn't dominate it as it did, but it still
presents What I think is its great value, and I've
always thought it was its great value, was that it
is sort of the keeper of the keys of the tradition of
the institution. It is the thing that makes A&M
different, and I think positively different, in
the positive sense. I think the Corps has always
been a good influence, but it occasionally gets
too wrapped up in itself, and then you get real
problems. That's when you have to do something
like this.
Was Fred McClure one of the commanders, four
commanders when you were here? He was a black guy.
Was he corps commander or was he president of the
student body? President of the student body,
that's right. Was he a member of the corps? Well, he
had just gone before I got here. He was wonderful.
I've always thought of the corps, one of his great
assets and strengths, as a good minority group.
Absolutely. Still is. Still is. What do you see as
the future of the Corps at Texas A&M and military
programs in general? I can't see the Corps ever
disappearing from Texas A&M. I can't see. I think
that would be a disaster for the institution. I
know you and I share this same view. What would you
have at A&M? You'd have another University of
Texas, only a smaller one, a little bit. You
wouldn't have a distinctive institution. with
the kind of representation of tradition, which I
think is vital to a place like this. Do you think
that is one of the unique qualities? Oh, yes.
That's one of the reasons I wanted to come to A&M. I
really believed in the idea of the
Corps doesn't have the motto of duty, honor,
country, but it represents that. And that, to me,
is all to the good. As an old tea sipper, it's been
quite a revelation for me, too. Yeah, isn't it? It
really is. And I have come to be a great admirer of
Coke, as you are. Well, I don't want to... Oh, go on.
I'm having fun. Oh, all right. With the... We've
talked about minority recruiting. We've talked
about the four cadets. What about growth, just
pure physical growth? Was that a problem for you
during your eight years? Mm-hmm. It was. And Gordy
and I, along with others, the deans all together,
decided we were going to have to try to stop it.
Unbridled growth was going to lead to disaster
because the budget was leveling off. And it was
hard for everybody to accept that, Henry, to stop
growth. It was hard for me to accept it. It was
secret. It was hard for me to stop it because I liked
the thought that A&M was growing. It made me feel
that people loved the university and wanted to
send their children here. I liked that. But at the
same time, I knew we couldn't go on this way because
we were going to lose quality with numbers. The
money was stopping so the library couldn't grow.
Scientific equipment couldn't keep up. We
weren't going to be able to keep up with classroom
footage. We were going to have to stop growth. Now,
how do you do that? because the board has the same
feeling I have. It's very nice that wherever the
board goes, people want to send their kids to A&M.
Was there any sense among, you always hear this
gossip, among board members that they really did
want A&M to be as big as Texas? Oh, yeah. Bigger.
Bigger. Bigger. Sure. Sure. So limiting would be
very hard. Mm-hmm. Excuse me, there was no doubt
that it was better already. You understand that?
Oh, yeah, right. But bigger, bigger was better. So
how do you persuade them that it ain't? Well, the
board had changed a little. John Mobley had come on
from Austin. The guy from San Antonio, who runs all
the radio stations, Hayes? Mayes. Mayes was on.
There was a little more opening.
Who was the guy who later became chairman of the
board? I should remember his name well. A very good
friend of mine. Ran the Granada. Oh, sure. Ellard,
David Ellard. David Ellard, sure. You ever see
him? I see him every once in a while. Talk to him
often.
This group was more open to,
the pitch I kept making and Gordy kept making to
him, and the dean,
was, look, we're not only trying to modernize A&M,
we're trying to improve it. to make it the best
university in Texas and in the area. Now that was
something they could understand.
So we made a plan, an academic plan, to level off the
growth. And we had a long presentation to the board
with all kinds of backup about why this had to be
done. You know, dollars versus people. And they
bought it. They bought the idea of it. Basically,
what they did was slow growth through more
selective recruiting. That's right. Selective
recruiting. They didn't like that because they
loved to tell their constituents wherever they
were, we'll take anybody. Yeah, we'll take care of
you. But they bought the idea of slow growth and
selective growth. And we kept pointing out that
the SAT numbers were going up. We were getting
better students, getting better students.
We were able to point out as the minority
recruiting went along, we were not only getting
more minorities, we were getting high-quality
minorities, and we were keeping them. We could
recruit minorities, and we still have the best
record in the state for keeping them once we get
them, and the board liked that. And the thing that
really got them was the time we finally beat Rice
and Texas in recruiting national merit scholars.
Beat them one year. That was the greatest moment.
Oh, the board was so proud they went around popping
their buttons. What do you think was the most
difficult time you had as president? God, there
were so many, Henry. Was it athletics? Athletics
was the worst, I think. Worst problem. And
minority recruiting was hard. Minority
recruiting was hard. As I say, they did it, but it
was tough. What
was the most difficult time you had or issue, let's
say, with the board? Was there any special? There
was one special day. Totally surprised me. I was
not ready for this at all. That's when you really
get it. That's when those things usually happen.
That's right. I was summoned to the board. I
thought the board had left town. I thought the
board had left town, and I was summoned back. I'd
already headed for the golf course, so I come back
in my golf club, and they're all sitting there
looking at me.
The entree knew. My biggest enemy on the board was
Billy Mack McKenzie, who, for reasons I do not know
to this day, never liked me from the day I got the
job. But he was always laying in the gap to get me,
and he was sitting there literally enjoying this
meeting, I could tell. So I knew I was in big
trouble. and they were all looking at a copy of the
battalion and there was some article i hadn't seen
it and if i'd seen it it wouldn't have bothered me
you know but there was an article in there critical
of the board i don't know something they had they
ought to have done maybe it had to do with
minorities i don't know but anyway it was they were
all pissed really and
So one of them, I don't remember who it was, said,
we want you to fire the editor of the battalion by
tonight and close the newspaper down.
Being totally unready for this, I didn't really
know what to say, Henry. And while I was reeling
from the shock, someone else pitched in, and you
will love this one. Do you know that history
professor who just said he is not in favor of mother
home and country?
Yes.
I also knew, and don't put this in, that I had snuck
him ten years. By not using his full name but his
initials, I'd gotten him tenure. Oh, really?
That's right. You were the only one who knows that.
But I'm proud of that. And I said, yes, I know him.
Does that son of a bitch have tenure? Yes, he does.
Well, fire him anyway. And they meant it. It was not
a joke. And I sat there looking a little stunned,
I'm sure. Maybe my mouth was open, I don't know. And
one of them said, if you won't do it, we'll get
someone who will. Is that clear enough for you? So
that put a new face on it. And then John Cole spoke
up. And he said, well, Frank, isn't the issue of
what the battalion says about us, And isn't the
issue of what this professor says about mother,
home, and country protected under the rubric of
academic freedom? And I said, well, John, I would
have thought so. He said, well, gentlemen, we're
on record as supporting academic freedom. Can't
we move on to something more fruitful? And the
whole thing collapsed like a busted balloon. And
defused it right there. Right there. You are
greatly indebted to that man. Don't tell me I have
always known him. That's a good story. Isn't that a
great story? That's a great story. Now there is a
regent who was a regent. Can't we move on to
something more fruitful? Well, I remember those
times because that history professor was in my
department. I know he was. I know he was. And he gave
me hell, too. Well, you know, I still think we did
the right thing. Well, I know you did. You did, too.
He was a great teacher. Yeah. He doesn't know how I
snuck that tenure forward. Also, there's
something else you need to know. You will find this
not surprising, but I did when I first encountered
him. The board spent endless hours on building
programming. That was their main interest,
building. They had an edifice complex,
literally. But you send up a big pile of names for
tenure, and they passed it in two minutes. They
never even read it. And I thought, well, with
people like the man you and I are talking about,
they would have singled him out because they were
so mad. They didn't even read the list of tenure.
And this was the future of the university.
Yeah, maybe, you know, that's good. Well, it had
its good moments. It had its good moments. And one
of the things that I put in that I'm proud of was a
different way to review tenure and promotion. You
probably know that it changed. It came up through
the proper channels. And before the final
decision was made, I read every tenure
recommendation. And then, remember, I asked
everybody to send up the ones they didn't want to
promote. Because I was afraid people were being
deliberately ignored. And I think that was the
right thing to do. I think a lot of structure and
form development was not here before. I think the
old hierarchy had literally been bad. That was it.
The deans and department heads. My big failure,
you want to know my big failure? Yes. I wanted to
change it from heads to chairman. Yeah. And I never
could make it. Well, I guarantee you in history we
did. It was kind of over my dead body, I might add.
But it did. Maybe not entirely, but certainly in
practice. Well, you know, I had suffered under a
longstanding head. Not suffered. You know, I
loved him. But he'd been head of the department at
Rice for 31 years. Now, that is a bit long. That is
long. We've had similar situations. Yes, I know. I
know. Yes, I know. But then it seemed to me that we
ought to, it didn't matter if you re-elected the
same guy. That'd be fine, but we ought to have a way
to do that. But I couldn't break that log jam. Okay,
let's close out, but with some kind of comment from
you, if you don't mind, about where you see A&M
going this next decade or thereafter. I'm very
worried. I'm very worried that the legislature,
in its wisdom, is going to do its end from the
standpoint of money. The expansion of the A&M
system sounded good, but it's watering down a lot
of the assets of the university. I
think that's true. Now, Herb may have a different
point of view, but it seems to me that each of these
new institutions feel that they ought to have some
part of the pie of course which is why they want to
get into the system and the puff was created to make
texas and a m that was supposed to be the excellence
fund and it's now in there you're operating off the
available fund it's now the non-available fund
one of my favorite stories going around would
irritate the aggies at first and then they loved it
is what is this two-thirds This is one-third. And
that's the way that it was divided. But we haven't
got it anymore. The available fund is down to zip,
practically. And it was, some years when I was in,
it seems to me my memory has any kind of relevance
still to reality. At one point in one year, we had
$60 million in the available fund. which you could
really do great things with. If you had a good
academic plan, you could really do great things.
So you think the financial constraints are there?
That's going to hurt us badly. And every
university does that. Oh, yeah, yeah. But it's
going to be bad here because, and again,
discounted because it may be me talking about the
past, but I think we were really on a roll upward. I
think we were doing extremely well. And I think
it's plateauing because of money problems. And
that hurts you. Sure.
Well, I think that's maybe a sand, but a good place
to close. Well, let me tell you one more thing. I'm
trying to remember what year this was. This must
have been about 86, when we were coming up to a new
budget cycle. And it was clear that we were going to
go through the same mess in Austin that we'd had the
previous budget cycle, 84. And I knew we were going
to, if we were lucky, very lucky, we might be even
with the board, but we weren't going to have
anything extra. And what the legislature was
doing consistently, and that's what's working so
badly now, was driving us increasingly back on the
AUF. They'd say, you can give more money to the
library, but take it out of the AUF. And they'd give
it to somebody else. And at one point there, Gordy
and I and later Donald, were pumping a million
dollars a year out of the available fund extra into
the library. You probably knew that because it was
good for the history department. Yeah, and it
still wasn't enough. It wasn't nearly enough, but
that was our extra, you know. So I had a meeting of
all the, I had the vice president of the United
States, Eddie Joe, and all the vice presidents and
deans, no, the vice presidents and the, and Gordy
and them, and they were talking about the
finances, and we had a big presentation on what the
budget would look like and projecting it into the
next year. And they gave me three plans, like they
always gave Lyndon, three plans, A, B, and C, and
they always had it structured so you had to take C.
They used to piss him off, you know, and this was
really pissing me off, too. C was the only one who
was viable. I said, look, there's a fourth one you
haven't constructed yet. I want you to construct
me a budget for every college with 2% less than you
have projected here on your program fee. What? I
said, that's called the president's tax. And
we're going to tax every college 2% and put it in the
kitty for next year. And that's where the money
came for the next year. And it worked. It worked.
You got it all back, but you got it back when you
really need it. I was very proud of that innovative
system on the spur of the moment. While you're on
the subject, what do you think about future
funding in terms of the talk about using the
lottery money and all this kind of stuff? I don't
know what we're going to do. I don't think
university funding in Texas is ever going to be
worth a tinker's damn until we get to state income
tax. I think that's what's going to have to happen,
or some windfall profit from something. But it
looks to me, you know, the problem is that
educational money, particularly higher
education, is one earmarked fund that the
legislature can get its hands on. All the others
are entitlements, and this they can grab. And
that's what's hurting us. So you have to battle for
it. Oh, it's getting worse and worse. I just feel
for Eddie Joe and Bill and Herb when they go over to
Austin. I tell you, it is no fun. How'd you happen to
decide you were ready to leave the presidency?
Well, I got to, you know, I don't know if I can
explain it except in schematic terms. I got
vibrations, feelings, that my time was about up. I
got the feeling that, you know, I could hang on a
while, but I'd done about all I was going to be able
to do. And when you get the feeling that you're
being tolerated That's the time to get out before
they push you out.
But you decided you wanted to stay at A&M. Yeah, I
liked A&M. I didn't want to rush off somewhere
else. I had two or three places I might have gone,
but I thought I'd stay here. Because here I have a
great opportunity to write books and enjoy myself
and teach. Yeah, I didn't want to leave A&M. I liked
it. So you retired from the, or you stepped down
from the presidency, affected when? The end of the
academic year 88. And you became director of the
Mosier Institute. Yes, yes. At that point. Yeah,
right. And what was I going to tell
you? Oh, something I'd like to say in favor of the
Board of Regents. Every single academic request
academic request that the administration took to
the board we got very good that's a very strong
regard i think that's very important to be in the
record all right sir thank you so much for your time
you're welcome appreciate it very much and i may
come back to you on the phone or the person and ask
you would you explain this a little bit or
something you're most welcome you're most
welcome But I think this would be a big help. And as I
say, it's going to be more of an impressionistic
approach, I think, when I start writing. Well, I'm
glad you did it, because I never...